Revamp/dql quickstart (#363)
dgraph-io/dgraph-docs: content/get-started/index.md

+++
title = "DQL Quickstart"
aliases = ["/get-started-old"]
[menu.main]
  name = "DQL quickstart"
  identifier = "get-started"
  parent = "dql"
  weight = 2
+++

This is a quickstart guide to run [DQL]({{<relref "dgraph-glossary.md#RDF">}}) queries and mutations. For an interactive walkthrough, take the [tour](https://dgraph.io/tour/).

This guide helps you:

* Understand how JSON data are represented as a graph
* Query the graph using DQL
* Use indexes

## Step 1: Run Dgraph

The easiest way to get Dgraph up and running is using the [Dgraph Cloud](https://cloud.dgraph.io).  
You can Login to Dgraph cloud using **Sign in with Google**, **Sign in with GitHub** or any other email account that you prefer to use.

1. In the Dgraph cloud console, click **Launch new backend**.
1. Select a plan, cloud provider, and region that meets your requirements.
1. Type a name for your Dgraph cloud instance.
1. Click **Launch**  
1. Click **Ratel** to access the UI that provides browser-based queries, mutations and visualizations.

> ### Step 2: Run Mutation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2: Run Mutation
```

In the **Console** page, select **Mutate** tab and paste the following:

   ```dql
   {
   "set": [
     {
       "name":"Star Wars: Episode IV - A New Hope",
       "release_date": "1977-05-25",
       "director": {
         "name": "George Lucas",
         "dgraph.type": "Person"
       },
       "starring" : [
         {
           "name": "Luke Skywalker"
         },
         {
           "name": "Princess Leia"
         },
         {
           "name": "Han Solo"
         }
       ]
     },
     {
       "name":"Star Trek: The Motion Picture",
       "release_date": "1979-12-07"
     }
   ]

 }  
   ```
The input data is in JSON. (Dgraph also support [RDF]({{<relref "dgraph-glossary.md#RDF">}}) notation).
The sample JSON data is an array of two movies with some attributes.

There will be stored as [Nodes]({{<relref "dgraph-glossary.md#node">}}) in Dgraph.

The "Star Wars" movie has a `director` field which is an json object and a `starring` field which is and array of json objects.
Each object will be also stored as a Node in Dgraph and `director` and `starring` will be stored as [relations]({{<relref "dgraph-glossary.md#relation">}}).

Click Run to execute the mutation.

> Have a look at DGraph response in the JSON tab:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
View the Dgraph response in the JSON tab:
```

```dql
{
  "data": {
    "code": "Success",
    "message": "Done",
    "queries": null,
    "uids": {
      "dg.1119451236.100": "0xfffd8d726c1de414",
      "dg.1119451236.101": "0xfffd8d726c1de40f",
      "dg.1119451236.102": "0xfffd8d726c1de410",
      "dg.1119451236.103": "0xfffd8d726c1de411",
      "dg.1119451236.104": "0xfffd8d726c1de412",
      "dg.1119451236.99": "0xfffd8d726c1de413"
    }
  }, ...
  ```

Note that Dgraph gives you the universal identifiers ([UID]({{<relref "dgraph-glossary.md#uid">}})) of the created nodes.

> ### Step 3: First query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: First query
```

> To Get all movies, in the **Console** page, select **Query** tab and run this query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.    In the **Console** page, select **Query** tab and run this query:
```

```dql
{
 movies(func: has(release_date)) {
   name
   director { name }
   starring { name }
  }
}
```

> The query lists all nodes that have a `release_date` and for each, it looks for the  `director` and `starring` relations and provide the name attribute of the related nodes if any.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query lists all movies that have a `release_date` and for each, it looks for the  `director` and `starring` relations and provide the name attribute of the related nodes if any.
```

> On the response panel, select the panel "Graph", a Graph output appears:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.    In the response panel, select **Graph**, to view a Graph output:
```

{{<figure class="smallimage" src="/images/dql-quickstart/img1.png" title="Query result" >}}

> ### Step 4: Alter Schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 4: Alter Schema
```

Alter the schema to add indexes on some of the data so queries can use term matching, filtering and sorting.

In the **Schema** page, select **Predicates**. You notice that Dgraph has created the precates `name`, `release-date`,`director` and `starring`.

A [predicate]({{<relref "dgraph-glossary.md#predicate">}}) is Dgraph internal representation of a node attribute or a relation.

> Select the `name` predicate. Ratel displays details about the predicate type and indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.   Select the `name` predicate. Ratel displays details about the predicate type and indexes.
```

> Select `index` and select `term` for the index type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.    Select **index** and choose **term** for the index type.
```

Author: solved

> Click Update to apply the index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.    Click **Update** to apply the index.
```

{{<figure class="smallimage" src="/images/dql-quickstart/predicate-name.png" title="Adding an index" >}}

> Select `release_date` predicate, change the type to `date`, select `index` and select `year` for the index type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.    Select `release_date` predicate, change the type to **date**, select **index** and choose **year**for the index type.
```

> Click Update to apply the index on the release-date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.    Click **Update** to apply the index on the `release-date`.
```

> ### Step 5: Queries using indexes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 5: Queries using indexes
```

Let's get the movies having the term "Star" in their name and released before "1979".

In the **Console** page select **Query** tab and run this query:

```dql
{

>   me(func: allofterms(name, "Star"), orderasc: release_date) @filter(lt(release_date, "1978")) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  me(func: allofterms(name, "Star"), orderasc: release_date) @filter(lt(release_date, "1979")) {
```

    }
  }
}
```

Observe the JSON result and the graph result.

You can play with the release date and the search terms conditions to see Dgraph search and filtering in action.

> In these five steps, we set up Dgraph, added some data, visualize it as a graph, add indexes and queried the data .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these five steps, you set up Dgraph, added some data, visualized it as a graph, added indexes and queried the data .
```
